<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			
<div><h1 id='ch4'>CHAPTER IV<br/> <span style='font-size:smaller'>THE “MELODY IN F”</span></h1></div>

<p>Gilbert Standerton was dressing slowly before his
glass when Leslie was announced. That individual
was radiant and beautiful to behold as became the
best man at the wedding of an old friend.</p>

<p>Leslie Frankfort was one of those fortunate
individuals who combine congenial work with the
enjoyment of a private income. He was the junior
partner of a firm of big stockbrokers in the City, a
firm which dealt only with the gilt-edged markets of
finance. He enjoyed in common with Gilbert a taste
for classical music, and this was the bond which had
first drawn the two men together.</p>

<p>He came into the room, deposited his silk hat carefully
upon a chair, and sat on the edge of the bed, offering
critical suggestions to the prospective bridegroom.</p>

<p>“By the way,” he said suddenly, “I saw that old
man of yours yesterday.”</p>

<p>Gilbert looked round.</p>

<p>“You mean Springs, the musician?”</p>

<p>The other nodded.</p>

<p>“He was playing for the amusement of a theatre
queue—a fine old chap.”</p>

<p>“Very,” said Gilbert absently.</p>

<p>He paused in his dressing, took up a letter from the
table, and handed it to the other.</p>

<p>“Am I to read it?” asked Leslie.</p>

<p>Gilbert nodded.</p>

<p>“There’s nothing to read, as a matter of fact,” he
said; “it’s my uncle’s wedding present.”</p>

<p>The young man opened the envelope and extracted
the pink slip. He looked at the amount and
whistled.</p>

<p>“One hundred pounds,” he said. “Good Lord! That
won’t pay the upkeep of your car for a quarter. I
suppose you told Mrs. Cathcart?”</p>

<p>Gilbert shook his head.</p>

<p>“No,” he said shortly, “I intended telling her
but I haven’t. I am perfectly satisfied in my own
mind, Leslie, that we are doing her an injustice. She
has been so emphatic about money. And after all,
I’m not a pauper,” he said with a smile.</p>

<p>“You’re worse than a pauper,” said Leslie earnestly;
“a man with six hundred a year is the worst kind of
pauper I know.”</p>

<p>“Why?”</p>

<p>“You’ll never bring your tastes below a couple of
thousand, you’ll never raise your income above six
hundred—plus your Foreign Office job, that’s only
another six hundred.”</p>

<p>“Work,” said the other.</p>

<p>“Work!” said the other scornfully, “you don’t
earn money by work. You earn money by scheming,
by getting the better of the other fellow. You’re
too soft-hearted to make money, my son.”</p>

<p>“You seem to make money,” said Gilbert with a
little smile.</p>

<p>Leslie shook his head vigorously.</p>

<p>“I’ve never made a penny in my life,” he confessed
with some enjoyment. “No, I have got some very
stout, unimaginative senior partners who do all the
money-making. I merely take dividends at various
periods of the year. But then I was in luck. What
is your money, by the way?”</p>

<p>Gilbert was in the act of tying his cravat. He looked
up with a little frown.</p>

<p>“What do you mean?” he asked.</p>

<p>“I mean, is it in securities—does it continue after
your death?”</p>

<p>The little frown still knit the brows of the other.</p>

<p>“No,” he said shortly, “after my death there is
scarcely enough to bring in a hundred and fifty a
year. I am only enjoying a life interest on this
particular property.”</p>

<p>Leslie whistled.</p>

<p>“Well, I hope, old son, that you’re well insured.”</p>

<p>The other man made no attempt to interrupt as
Leslie, arguing with great fluency and skill on the
duties and responsibilities of heads of families, delivered
himself of his views on insurance and upon the
uninsured.</p>

<p>“Some Johnnies are so improvident,” he said. “I
knew a man——”</p>

<p>He stopped suddenly. He had caught a reflection
of Gilbert’s face in the glass. It was haggard and
drawn, it seemed the face of a man in mortal agony.
Leslie sprang up.</p>

<p>“What on earth is the matter, my dear chap?”
he cried. He came to the other’s side and laid his
hand on his shoulder.</p>

<p>“Oh, it’s nothing—nothing, Leslie,” said Gilbert.</p>

<p>He passed his hand before his eyes as though to
wipe away some ugly vision.</p>

<p>“I’m afraid I’ve been rather a careless devil.
You see, I depended too much upon uncle’s money.
I ought to be insured.”</p>

<p>“That isn’t worrying you surely?” asked the other
in astonishment.</p>

<p>“It worries me a bit,” said Gilbert moodily. “One
never knows, you know——”</p>

<p>He stood looking thoughtfully at the other, his
hands thrust into his pockets.</p>

<p>“I wish to heaven this wedding had been postponed!”</p>

<p>Leslie laughed.</p>

<p>“It’s about time you were married,” he said.
“What a jumpy ass you are.”</p>

<p>He looked at his watch.</p>

<p>“You’d better hurry up, or you’ll be losing this
bride of yours. After all, this isn’t a day for gloom;
it’s the day of days, my friend.”</p>

<p>He saw the soft look that came into Gilbert’s eyes,
and felt satisfied with his work.</p>

<p>“Yes, there is that,” said Gilbert Standerton softly.
“I forgot all my blessings. God bless her!” he said
under his breath.</p>

<p>As they were leaving the house, Gilbert asked—</p>

<p>“I suppose you have a list of the guests who are
to be present?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said the other, “Mrs. Cathcart was most
duteous.”</p>

<p>“Will Dr. Barclay-Seymour be there?” asked the
other carelessly.</p>

<p>“Barclay-Seymour—no, he won’t be there,” replied
Leslie, “he’s the Leeds Johnnie, isn’t he? He went
up from London last night. What’s this talk of your
having run away the other night?”</p>

<p>“It was an important engagement,” said Gilbert
hurriedly, “I had a man to see; I couldn’t very well
put him off——”</p>

<p>Leslie realised that he had asked an embarrassing
question and changed the subject.</p>

<p>“By the way,” he said, “I shouldn’t mention this
matter of the money to Mrs. Cathcart till after you’ve
both settled down.”</p>

<p>“I won’t,” said Gilbert grimly.</p>

<p>On the way to the church he reviewed all the troubles
that were besetting him and faced them squarely.
Perhaps it would not be as bad as he thought. He
was ever prone to take an exaggerated and a worrying
view of troubles. He had anticipated dangers, and
time and time again his fears had been groundless.
He had lived too long alone. A man ought to be
married before he was thirty-two. That was his age.
He had become cranky. He found consolation in
uncomplimentary analysis till the church was reached.</p>

<p>It was a dream, that ceremony: the crowded pews,
the organ, the white-robed choir, the rector and his
assistants; the coming of Edith, so beautiful, so
ethereal in her bridal robes; the responses, the kneeling
and the rising—it was all unreal.</p>

<p>He had thought that the music would have made
a lasting impression on him; he had been at some
pains to choose it, and had had several consultations
with the organist. But at the end of the service
when he began to walk, still in his dream, towards
the vestry, he could not recall one single bar. He
had a dim recollection of the fact that above the altar
was a stained glass window, one tiny pane of which
had been removed, evidently on account of a breakage.</p>

<p>He was back in the house, sitting at the be-flowered
table, listening in some confusion to the speeches and
the bursts of laughter which assailed each speaker as
he made his point: now he was on his feet, talking
easily, without effort, but what words he used, or
why people applauded, or why they smiled he could
not say.</p>

<p>Once in its course he had looked down at the delicate
face by his side, and had met those solemn eyes of
hers, less fearful to-day, it seemed, than ever he had
seen them. He had felt for her hand and had held
it, cold and unresponsive, in his .&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.</p>

<p>“An excellent speech,” said Leslie.</p>

<p>They were in the drawing-room after the breakfast.</p>

<p>“You’re quite an orator.”</p>

<p>“Am I?” said Gilbert.</p>

<p>He was beginning to wake again. The drawing-room
was real, these people were real, the jokes, the badinage,
and the wit which flew from tongue to tongue—all
these things were of a life he knew.</p>

<p>“Whew!” He wiped his forehead and breathed a
deep sigh. He felt like a man who had regained
consciousness after an anæsthetic that did not quite
take effect. A painless and a beautiful experience,
but of another world, and it was not he, so he told
himself, who had knelt at the altar rail.</p>

<hr/>

<p>Officially the honeymoon was to be spent at
Harrogate, actually it was to be spent in London.
They preserved the pretence of catching a train, and
drove to King’s Cross.</p>

<p>No word was spoken throughout that journey.
Gilbert felt the restriction, and did not challenge it or
seek to overcome it. The girl was naturally silent.
She had so much to say in the proper place and at
the proper time. He saw the old fear come back to
her eyes, was hurt by the unconscious and involuntary
shrinking when his hand touched hers.</p>

<p>The carriage was dismissed at King’s Cross. A
taxi-cab was engaged, and they drove to the house
in St. John’s Wood. It was empty, the servants had
been sent away on a holiday, but it was a perfectly
fitted little mansion. There were electric cookers,
and every labour-saving appliance the mind of man
could devise, or a young man with great expectations
and no particular idea of the value of money could
acquire.</p>

<p>This was to be one of the joys of the honeymoon,
so Gilbert had told himself. She had willingly dispensed
with her maid; he was ready to be man-of-all-work,
to cook and to serve, leaving the rough work for the
two new day servants he had employed to come in
in the morning.</p>

<p>Yet it was with no sense of joyfulness that he led
her from room to room, showed her the treasures of
his household. A sense of apprehension of some coming
trouble laid its hand upon his tongue, damped his
spirit, and held him in temporary bondage.</p>

<p>The girl was self-possessed. She admired, criticised
kindly, and rallied him gently upon his domesticity.
But the strain was there all the time; there was a
shadow which lay between them.</p>

<p>She went to her room to change. They had arranged
to go out to dinner, and this programme they followed.
Leslie Frankfort saw them in the dining hall of Princes,
and pretended he didn’t know them. It was ten o’clock
when they went back to their little house.</p>

<p>Gilbert went to his study; his wife had gone up to
her room and had promised to come down for coffee.
He went to work with all the skill which a pupil of
Rahbat might be expected to display, and brewed
two tiny little cups of Mocha. This he served on the
table near the settee where she would sit .&nbsp;.&nbsp;. Then
she came in.</p>

<p>He had been fast awakening from the dream of the
morning. He was alive now. The dazement of that
momentous ceremony had worn away. He rose and
went a little way towards her. He would have taken
her in his arms then and there, but this time the
arm’s length was a reality. Her hand touched his
breast, and the arm stiffened. He felt the rebuff in
the act, and it seemed to him that his heart went
cold, and that all the vague terrors of the previous
days crystallised into one concrete and terrible truth.
He knew all that she had to say before she spoke.</p>

<p>It was some time before she found the words she
wanted, the opening was so difficult.</p>

<p>“Gilbert,” she said at last, “I am going to do a
cowardly thing. It is only cowardly because I have
not told you before.”</p>

<p>He motioned her to the settee.</p>

<p>He had woven a little romance for this moment, a
dream scene which was never to be enacted. Here
was the shattering.</p>

<p>“I won’t sit down,” she said, “I want all my
strength to tell you what I have to tell you. If I
hadn’t been an arrant coward I should have told you
last night. I meant to tell you,” she said, “but you
did not come.”</p>

<p>He nodded.</p>

<p>“I know,” he said, almost impatiently. “I could
not come. I did not wish—I could not come,” he
repeated.</p>

<p>“You know what I have to tell you?” Her eyes
were steadily fixed on his. “Gilbert, I do not love
you.”</p>

<p>He nodded again.</p>

<p>“I know now,” he said.</p>

<p>“I never have loved you,” she said in tones
of despair; “there never was any time when
I regarded you as more than a dear friend.
But——”</p>

<p>She wanted to tell him why, but a sense of loyalty
to her mother kept her silent. She would take all
the blame, for was she not blameworthy? For she,
at least, was mistress of her own soul: had she wished,
she could have taken a line of greater resistance than
that which she had followed.</p>

<p>“I married you,” she went on slowly, “because—because
you are—rich—because you will be rich.”</p>

<p>Her voice dropped at the last word until it was
husky. There was a hard fight going on within her.
She wanted to tell the truth, and yet she did not want
him to think so badly of her as that.</p>

<p>“For my money!” he repeated wonderingly.</p>

<p>“Yes, I—I wanted to marry a man with money.
We have had—a very hard time.”</p>

<p>The confession came in little gasps; she had to
frame every sentence before she spoke.</p>

<p>“You mustn’t blame mother, I was equally guilty;
and I ought to have told you—I wanted to tell you.”</p>

<p>“I see,” he said calmly.</p>

<p>It is wonderful what reserves of strength come at
a man’s bidding. In this terrible crisis, in this moment
when the whole of his life’s happiness was shattered,
when the fabric of his dream was crumbling like a
house of paper, he could be judicial, almost
phlegmatic.</p>

<p>He saw her sway, and springing to her side caught
her.</p>

<p>“Sit down,” he said quietly.</p>

<p>She obeyed without protest. He settled her in the
corner of the settee, pushed a cushion almost viciously
behind her, and walked back to the fireplace.</p>

<p>“So you married me for my money,” he said, and
laughed.</p>

<p>It was not without its amusing side, this situation.</p>

<p>“By Heaven, what a comedy—what a comedy!”
He laughed again. “My poor child,” he said, with
unaccustomed irony, “I am sorry for you, for you
have secured neither husband nor money!”</p>

<p>She looked up at him quickly.</p>

<p>“Nor money,” she repeated.</p>

<p>There was only interest that he saw in her eyes.
There was no hint of disappointment. He knew the
truth, more than she had told him: it was not she who
desired a fortune, it was this mother of hers, this
domineering, worldly woman.</p>

<p>“No husband and no money,” he repeated savagely,
in spite of the almost yearning desire which was in
him to spare her.</p>

<p>“And worse than that”—with two rapid strides he
was at the desk which separated them, and bent
across it, leaning heavily—“not only have you no
husband, and not only is there no money, but——”</p>

<p>He stopped as if he had been shot.</p>

<p>The girl, looking at him, saw his face go drawn and
grey, saw the eyes staring wildly past her, the mouth
open in tragic dismay. She got up quickly.</p>

<p>“What is it? What is it?” she whispered in
alarm.</p>

<p>“My God!”</p>

<p>His voice was cracked; it was the voice of a man
in terror. She half bent her head, listening. From
somewhere beneath the window arose the soft,
melancholy strains of a violin. The music rose and
fell, sobbing and pulsating with passion beneath the
magic of the player’s fingers. She stepped to a window
and looked out. On the edge of the pavement a girl
was playing, a girl whose poverty of dress did not hide
her singular beauty.</p>

<p>The light from the street lamp fell upon her pale
face, her eyes were fixed on the window where Gilbert
was standing.</p>

<p>Edith looked at her husband. He was shaking like
a man with fever.</p>

<p>“The ‘Melody in F,’ ” he whispered. “My God!
The ‘Melody in F’—and on my wedding day!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
