<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter">
			
<div><h1 id='ch14'>CHAPTER XIV<br/> <span style='font-size:smaller'>THE STANDERTON DIAMONDS</span></h1></div>

<p>Edith Standerton made a quick preparation for her
journey. She would take her maid into Huntingdon,
and go without Gilbert. It was embarrassing that she
must go alone, but she had set herself a task, and if
she could help her husband by appearing at the dinner
of his irritable relative she would do so.</p>

<p>She had her evening things packed, and caught the
four o’clock train for the town of Tinley.</p>

<p>The old man did her the exceptional honour of
meeting her at the station.</p>

<p>“Where is Gilbert?” he asked when they had
mutually introduced themselves.</p>

<p>“He has been called out of town unexpectedly,”
she said. “He will be awfully upset when he knows.”</p>

<p>“I think not,” said the old General grimly. “It
takes a great deal to upset Gilbert—certainly more
than an opportunity of being reconciled to a grouchy
old man. As a matter of fact,” he went on, “there is
no reconciliation necessary; but I always look upon
anybody whom I have to cut out of my will as one who
regards me as a mortal enemy.”</p>

<p>“Please never put me in your will.”</p>

<p>She smiled.</p>

<p>“I’m not so sure about that,” said he, and added
gallantly, “though I think Nature has sufficiently
endowed you to enable you to dispense with such
mundane gifts as money!”</p>

<p>She made a little face at that.</p>

<p>He was delighted with her, and found her a charming
companion. Edith Standerton exerted herself to please
him. She had a style of treating people older than
herself in such a way as to suggest that she was as
young as they. I do not know any other phrase which
would more exactly convey my meaning than that.
She had a charm which appealed to this wayward
old man.</p>

<p>Edith did not know the cause of the change in her
husband’s fortunes. She knew very little, indeed, of
his affairs; enough she knew that for some reason or
other he had been disinherited through no fault of his
own. She did not even know that it was the result of
a caprice of this old man.</p>

<p>“You must come again and bring Gilbert,” said the
General, before they dispersed to dress for dinner.
“I shall be delighted to put you both up.”</p>

<p>Fortunately she was saved the embarrassment of
an answer, for the General jumped up suddenly.</p>

<p>“I know what you’d like to see,” he said, “you’d
like to see the Standerton diamonds, and so you
shall!”</p>

<p>She had no desire to see the Standerton diamonds,
had, indeed, no knowledge that such an heirloom
existed; but he was delighted at the prospect of showing
her, and she, being a woman, was not averse to a view
of these precious jewels, even though she were not
destined to wear them.</p>

<p>He led the way up to the library, and Jack Frankfort
followed.</p>

<p>“There they are,” said the old man proudly, and
pointed to a big safe in the corner, a large and ornate
safe.</p>

<p>“That is something new,” he said proudly. “I
bought it from a man who wanted sixty guineas for it—an
infernal, swindling, travelling rascal! I got it for
thirty. What do you think of that for a safe?”</p>

<p>“I think it’s very pretty,” said Jack. He could
think of nothing more fitting.</p>

<p>The old man glared at him.</p>

<p>“Pretty!” he growled. “What do you think I want
with ‘pretty’ things in my library?”</p>

<p>He took a bunch of keys from his pocket and opened
the door of the safe, pulled open a drawer, and took out
a large morocco case.</p>

<p>“There they are!” he said with pride, and indeed
he might well be proud of such a beautiful collection.</p>

<p>With all a girl’s love for pretty things Edith handled
the gorgeous jewels eagerly. The setting was old-fashioned,
but it was the old fashion which was at that
moment being copied. The stones sparkled and
glittered as though every facet carried a tiny electric
lamp to send forth the green, blue and roseate gleam
of its fire.</p>

<p>Even Jack Frankfort, no great lover of jewellery,
was fascinated by the sight.</p>

<p>“Why, sir,” he said, “there are nearly a hundred
thousand pounds’ worth of gems there.”</p>

<p>“More,” said the old man. “I’ve a pearl necklace
here,” and he pulled out another drawer, “look at it.
There is nearly two hundred thousand pounds’ worth of
jewellery in that safe.”</p>

<p>“In a thirty-guinea safe,” said Jack unwisely.</p>

<p>The old man turned on him.</p>

<p>“In a sixty-guinea safe,” he corrected violently.
“Didn’t I tell you I beat the devil down? I beg your
pardon, my dear.” He chuckled at the thought,
replaced the jewels, and locked the safe again. “Sixty
guineas he wanted. Came here with all his fine City
of London manner, frock-coat, top-hat, and patent
boots, my dear. The way these people get up is
scandalous. He might have been a gentleman by the
airs he gave himself.”</p>

<p>Jack looked at the safe. He had some ideas of
commercial values.</p>

<p>“I can’t understand how he sold it,” he said.
“This safe is worth two hundred pounds.”</p>

<p>“What?”</p>

<p>The old General turned on his lawyer in astonishment.</p>

<p>Jack nodded.</p>

<p>“I have one at my office, now that I come to think
of it,” he said. “It cost two hundred and twenty
pounds, and it is the same make.”</p>

<p>“He only asked me sixty guineas.”</p>

<p>“That’s strange. Do you mind opening it again?
I’d like to see the bolts.”</p>

<p>The General, nothing loath, turned the key and
pulled open the huge door. Jack looked at the square,
steel bolts—they were absolutely new.</p>

<p>“I can’t understand how he offered it for sixty.
You certainly had a bargain for thirty, sir,” he
said.</p>

<p>“I think I have,” said the General complacently.
“By the way, I am expecting a man to dinner to-night,”
he went on, as he led the way back to the drawing-room,
“a doctor man from Yorkshire—Barclay-Seymour.
Do you know him?”</p>

<p>Jack did not know him, but the girl broke in—</p>

<p>“Oh, yes, he is quite an old friend of mine.”</p>

<p>“He’s rather a fool,” said the General, adopting his
simple method of classification.</p>

<p>Edith smiled.</p>

<p>“You told me yesterday that there were only two
classes of people, General—rogues and fools. I am
wondering,” she said demurely, “in which class you
place me.”</p>

<p>The old man wrinkled his brows. He looked at the
beautiful young face in his high good humour.</p>

<p>“I must make a new class for you,” he said. “No,
you shall be in a class by yourself. But since most
women are fools——”</p>

<p>“Oh, come!” she protested, laughingly.</p>

<p>“They are,” he averred. “Look at me. If women
weren’t fools shouldn’t I have had a wife? If any
brilliant, ingenious lady, possessed of the necessary
determination had pursued me and had cultivated me,
I should not be a bachelor, leaving my money to people
who don’t care two—pins,” he hastily substituted a
milder phrase for the one he had intended, “whether
I’m alive or dead. Does your husband know the
Doctor, by the way?”</p>

<p>The girl shook her head.</p>

<p>“I don’t think so,” she said. “They nearly met
one night at dinner, but Gilbert had an engagement.”</p>

<p>“But Gilbert knows him,” insisted the old man.
“I’ve often talked to him about Barclay-Seymour,
who, by the way, is perhaps not such a fool as most
doctors. I used to be rather more enthusiastic about
him than I have been lately,” he admitted, “and I’m
afraid I used to ram old Barclay-Seymour down poor
Gilbert’s throat more than his ability or genius justified
me doing. Has he never spoken about him?”</p>

<p>The girl shook her head.</p>

<p>“Ungrateful devil!” growled the old General inconsequently.</p>

<p>One of his many footmen came into the drawing-room
at that moment with a telegram on a
salver.</p>

<p>“Hey hey?” demanded Sir John, fixing his glasses
on the tip of his nose and scowling up at his servant.
“What’s this?”</p>

<p>“A telegram, Sir John,” replied the footman.</p>

<p>“I can see it’s a telegram, you ass! When did it
come?”</p>

<p>“A few minutes ago, sir.”</p>

<p>“Who brought it?”</p>

<p>“A telegraph boy, Sir John,” said the imperturbable
servitor.</p>

<p>“Why didn’t you say so at first?” snapped Sir
John Standerton in a tone of relief. And Edith had
all she could do to prevent herself from bursting into
a fit of laughter at the little scene.</p>

<p>The old man opened the telegram, spread it out,
read it slowly and frowned. He read it again.</p>

<p>“Now, what on earth does that mean?” he asked,
and handed the telegram to the girl.</p>

<p>She read—</p>

<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">

<p>“Take the Standerton jewels out of your
safe and deposit them without fail in your
bank to-night. If it is too late to send them
to your bank place them under an armed
guard.”</p>

</blockquote>

<p>It was signed “Gilbert Standerton.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
