<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			
<div><h1 id='ch5'>CHAPTER V<br/> <span style='font-size:smaller'>THE MAN WHO DESIRED WEALTH</span></h1></div>

<p>Leslie Frankfort was one of a group of three who
stood in the inner office of Messrs. Warrell &amp; Bird
before a huge safe. There was plenty to attract and
hold their attention, for the floor was littered with
tools of every shape and description.</p>

<p>The safe itself bore evidence of a determined assault.
A semi-circle of holes had been burnt in its solid iron
door about the lock.</p>

<p>“They did that with an oxyhydrogen blow-pipe,”
said one of the men.</p>

<p>He indicated a number of iron tubes which lay
upon the ground with the rest of the paraphernalia.
“They made a thorough job of it. I wonder what
disturbed them.”</p>

<p>The eldest of the men shook his head.</p>

<p>“I expect the night watchman may have alarmed
them,” he said. “What do you think, Frankfort?”</p>

<p>“I haven’t got over my admiration for their
thoroughness yet,” said Leslie. “Why, the beggars
must have used about a couple of hundred pounds’
worth of tools.”</p>

<p>He pointed to the kit on the ground. The detective’s
gaze followed his extended finger. He smiled.</p>

<p>“Yes,” he said quietly, “these people are pretty
thorough. You say you’ve lost nothing?”</p>

<p>Mr. Warrell shook his head.</p>

<p>“Yes and no,” he said carefully. “There was a
diamond necklace which was deposited there last week
by a client of ours—that has gone. I am anxious for
the moment that this loss should not be reported.”</p>

<p>The detective looked at him wonderingly.</p>

<p>“That is rather a curious request,” he said, with a
smile; “and you don’t usually have diamond necklaces
in a stockbroker’s office—if I may be allowed to
make that critical remark.”</p>

<p>Mr. Warrell smiled.</p>

<p>“It isn’t usual,” he said, “but a client of ours who
went abroad last week came in just twenty minutes
before the train left, and asked us to take care of the
jewel cases.”</p>

<p>Mr. Warrell said this carelessly. He did not explain
to the detective that they were held as security against
the very large difference which the client had incurred;
nor did he think it necessary to explain that he had kept
the jewels in the office in the hope that the embarrassed
lady might be able to redeem them.</p>

<p>“Did anybody know they were there except yourself
and your partners?”</p>

<p>Warrell shook his head.</p>

<p>“I don’t think so. I have never mentioned it to
anybody. Have you, Leslie?”</p>

<p>Leslie hesitated.</p>

<p>“Well, I’m bound to admit that I did,” he confessed,
“though it was to somebody who would not repeat
it.”</p>

<p>“Who was it?” asked Warrell.</p>

<p>“To Gilbert Standerton. I certainly mentioned the
matter when we were discussing safe robberies.”</p>

<p>The elder man nodded.</p>

<p>“I hardly think he is the sort of person who is likely
to burgle a safe.”</p>

<p>He smiled.</p>

<p>“It is a very curious coincidence,” said Leslie
reflectively, “that he and I were talking about this
very gang only a couple of days ago before he was
married. I suppose,” he asked the detective suddenly,
“there is no doubt that this is the work of your international
friend?”</p>

<p>Chief Inspector Goldberg nodded his head.</p>

<p>“No doubt whatever, sir,” he said. “There is only
one gang in England which could do this, and I could
lay my hands on them to-day, but it would be a million
pounds to one against my being able to secure at the
same time evidence to convict them.”</p>

<p>Leslie nodded brightly.</p>

<p>“That is what I was telling Gilbert,” he said, turning
to his partner. “Isn’t it extraordinary that these
things can be in the twentieth century? Here we have
three or four men who are known—you told me their
names, Inspector, after the last attempt—and yet the
police are powerless to bring home their guilt to them.
It does seem curious, doesn’t it?”</p>

<p>Inspector Goldberg was not amused, but he permitted
himself to smile politely.</p>

<p>“But then you’ve got to remember how difficult it
is to collect evidence against men who work on such a
huge scale as do these bank smashers. What I can’t
understand,” he said, “is what attraction your safe
has for them. This second attempt is a much more
formidable one than the last.”</p>

<p>“Yes, this is really a burglary,” said Mr. Warrell.
“In the last case there was nothing so elaborate in their
preparations, though they were much more successful,
in so far as they were able to open the safe.”</p>

<p>“I suppose you don’t want more of this to get in the
papers than you can help,” said the Inspector.</p>

<p>Mr. Warrell shook his head.</p>

<p>“I don’t want any of it to get in till I have seen my
client,” he said; “but I am entirely in your hands, and
you must make such arrangements as you deem
necessary.”</p>

<p>“Very good,” said the detective. “For the moment
I do not think it is necessary to make any statement at
all. If the reporters get hold of it, you had better tell
them as much of the truth as you want to tell them,
but the chances are that they won’t even get to hear
of it as you communicated directly to the Yard.”</p>

<p>The police officer spent half an hour collecting and
making notes of such data as he was able to secure.
At the end of that time the old Jewry sent a contingent
of plain clothes policemen to remove the tools.</p>

<p>The burglars had evidently entered the office after
closing hours on the previous night, and had worked
through the greater part of the evening, and possibly
far into the night, in their successful attempt to cut out
the lock of the safe. That they had been disturbed in
their work was evident from the presence of the tools.
This was not their first burglary in the City of London.
During the previous six months the City had been
startled by a succession of daring robberies, the majority
of which had been successful.</p>

<p>The men had shown extraordinary knowledge of the
safe’s contents, and it was this fact which had induced
the police to narrow their circle of inquiry to three
apparently innocent members of an outside broker’s
firm. But try as they might, no evidence could be
secured which might even remotely associate them
with the crime.</p>

<p>Leslie remembered now that he had laughingly
challenged Gilbert Standerton to qualify for the big
reward which two firms at least had offered for the
recovery of their stolen goods.</p>

<p>“After all,” he said, “with your taste and genius,
you would make an ideal thief-catcher.”</p>

<p>“Or a thief,” Gilbert had answered moodily. It had
been one of his bad days, a day on which his altered
prospects had preyed upon him.</p>

<p>A telegram was waiting for Leslie when he entered
the narrow portals of the City Proscenium Club. He
took it down and opened it leisurely, and read its
contents. A puzzled frown gathered on his forehead.
It ran:—</p>

<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">

<p>“I must see you this afternoon. Meet me at
Charing Cross Station four o’clock.—<span epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">Gilbert.</span>”</p>

</blockquote>

<p>Punctually to the minute Leslie reached the terminus.
He found Gilbert pacing to and fro beneath the clock,
and was shocked at his appearance.</p>

<p>“What on earth is the matter with you?” he asked.</p>

<p>“Matter with me?” demanded the other hardly,
“what do you think is the matter with me?”</p>

<p>“Are you in trouble?” asked Leslie anxiously.</p>

<p>He was genuinely fond of this friend of his.</p>

<p>“Trouble?” Gilbert laughed bitterly. “My dear
good chap, I am always in trouble. Haven’t I been in
trouble since the first day I met you? I want you to
do something for me,” he went on briskly. “You were
talking the other day about money. I have recognised
the tragedy of my own dependence. I have got to get
money, and get it quick.”</p>

<p>He spoke briskly, and in a matter-of-fact tone, but
Leslie heard a determination which had never formed
part of his friend’s equipment.</p>

<p>“I want to know something about shares and
stocks and things of that sort,” Gilbert went on.
“You’ll have to instruct me. I don’t suppose you
know much about it yourself”—he smiled, with a
return to the old good-humour—“but what little you
know you’ve got to impart to me.”</p>

<p>“My dear chap,” protested the other, “why the
devil are you worrying about a thing like that for on
your honeymoon? Where is your wife, by the way?”</p>

<p>“Oh, she’s at the house,” said the other shortly.
He did not feel inclined to discuss her, and Leslie,
in his amazement, had sufficient tact to pass over the
subject.</p>

<p>“I can tell you all I know now, if you want a tip,”
he said.</p>

<p>“I want something bigger than a tip—I want
investments. I want you to tell me something that
will bring in about twelve thousand a year.”</p>

<p>Leslie stopped and looked at the other.</p>

<p>“Are you quite——?” he began.</p>

<p>Gilbert smiled, a crooked little smile.</p>

<p>“Am I right in my head?” he finished. “Oh,
yes, I am quite sane.”</p>

<p>“But don’t you see,” said the other, “you would
want a little over a quarter of a million to bring in
that interest.”</p>

<p>Gilbert nodded.</p>

<p>“I had an idea that some such amount was required.
I want you to get me out between to-night and
to-morrow a list of securities in which I can invest
and which must be gilt-edged, and must, as I say,
secure for me, or for my heirs, the sum I have
mentioned.”</p>

<p>“And did you,” asked the indignant Leslie, “bring
me to this beastly place on a hot afternoon in June
to pull my leg about your dream investments?”</p>

<p>But something in Gilbert’s face checked his humour.</p>

<p>“Seriously, do you mean this?” he asked.</p>

<p>“Seriously, I mean it.”</p>

<p>“Well, then, I’ll give you the list like a shot. What
has happened—has uncle relented?”</p>

<p>Gilbert shook his head.</p>

<p>“He is not likely to relent,” he said. “As a matter
of fact, I had a note to-day from his secretary to tell
me that he is pretty ill. I’m awfully sorry.” There
was a genuine note of regret in his tone. “He is a
decent old chap.”</p>

<p>“There’s no reason why he should hand over his
wealth to the ‘demnition bow-wows,’ ” quoted Leslie
indignantly. “But why did you meet me here, my
son? Your club is round the corner.”</p>

<p>“I know,” said Gilbert; “but the club is—well,
to tell you the truth,” he said, “I am giving up the
club.”</p>

<p>“Giving up your club?” He stood squarely before
the taller man. “Now just tell me,” he asked
deliberately, “what the Dickens all this means?
You’re giving up your club, you’ll be giving up your
Foreign Office job next, my Crœsus!”</p>

<p>Gilbert nodded.</p>

<p>“I have given up the Foreign Office work,” he
said quietly. “I want all the time I can get,”
he went on, speaking rapidly. “I want every
moment of the day for my own plans and my own
schemes. You don’t know what it’s all about, my
dear chap”—he laid his hand affectionately on the
other’s shoulder—“but just believe that I am in
urgent need of all the advice you can give me, and I
only want the advice for which I ask.”</p>

<p>“Which means that I am not to poke my nose in
your business unless I have a special invitation card
all printed and decorated. Very good,” laughed Leslie.
“Now come along to my club. I suppose as a result
of your brief married life you haven’t conceived a
dislike to all clubs?”</p>

<p>Gilbert made no answer, nor did they return again
to the subject until they were ensconced in the spacious
smoking-room of the Junior Terriers.</p>

<p>For two hours the men sat there, Gilbert questioning
eagerly, pointedly, jotting down notes upon a sheet
of paper. The other answered, often with some
difficulty, the running fire of questions which his
friend put.</p>

<p>“I didn’t know how little I knew,” confessed the
young man ruefully, as Gilbert wrote down the last
answer to the very last question. “What an encyclopædic
questioner you are; you’re a born examiner,
Gilbert.”</p>

<p>Gilbert smiled faintly as he slipped the sheet of
paper into his pocket.</p>

<p>“By the way,” he said, as they were leaving the
club, “I made my will this morning and I want you
to be my executor.”</p>

<p>Leslie pushed his hat back with a groan.</p>

<p>“You’re the most cheerless bird I’ve met for quite
a long time,” he said in exasperation. “You were
married yesterday, you’re wandering round to-day
with a face as long as an undertaker’s tout—I
understand such interesting and picturesque individuals
exist in the East End of London—you’ve chucked
up the billet that’s bringing you in quite a lot
of money, you’ve discussed investments, and
you’ve made your will. You’re a most depressing
devil!”</p>

<p>Again Gilbert smiled: he was grimly amused. He
shook hands with the young man before the club and
called a taxi-cab to him.</p>

<p>“I’m going to St. John’s Wood. I suppose you’re
not going my way?”</p>

<p>“I am relieved to hear that you are going to St.
John’s Wood,” said the other with mock politeness.
“I feared you were going to the nearest crematorium.”</p>

<p>Gilbert found his wife in the study on his return.
She was sitting on the big settee reading. The stress
of the previous night had left no mark upon her
beautiful face. She favoured him with a smile.
Instinctively they had both adopted the attitude
which best met the circumstances. Her respect for
him had increased, even in that short space of time;
he had so well mastered himself in that moment of
terror—terror which in an indefinable way had communicated
itself to her. He had met her the next
morning at breakfast cheerfully; but she did not
doubt that he had spent a sleepless night, for his eyes
were heavy and tired, and in spite of his geniality his
voice was sharp, as are the voices of men who have
cheated Nature.</p>

<p>He walked straight to his desk now.</p>

<p>“Do you want to be alone?” she asked.</p>

<p>He looked up with a start.</p>

<p>“No, no,” he said hastily, “I’ve no wish to be
alone. I’ve a little work to do, but you won’t bother
me. You ought to know,” he said with an affectation
of carelessness, “that I am resigning my post.”</p>

<p>“Your post!” she repeated.</p>

<p>“Yes; I find I have so much to do, and the Foreign
Office takes up so much of my time that I really can’t
spare, that it came to a question of giving up that
or something else.”</p>

<p>He did not enlighten her as to what that “something
else” was, nor could she guess. Already he was an
enigma to her; she found, strange though it seemed
to her, a new interest in him. That there was some
tragedy in his life, a tragedy unsuspected by her, she
did not doubt. He had told her calmly and categorically
the story of his disinheritance; at his request,
she had put the whole of that story into a letter which
she had addressed to her mother. She felt no qualms,
no inward quaking, at the prospect of the inevitable
encounter, though Mrs. Cathcart would be enraged
beyond reason.</p>

<p>Edith smiled a little to herself as she had stuck
down the flap of the envelope. This was poetic justice,
though she herself might be a life-long sufferer by
reason of her worldly parent’s schemings. She had
hoped that as a result of that letter, posted early in
the morning, her mother would have called and the
interview would have been finished before her husband
returned. But Gilbert had been in the house half an
hour when the blow fell. The tinkle of the hall bell
brought the girl to her feet: she had been waiting,
her ears strained, for that aggressive ring.</p>

<p>She herself flew down the stairs to open the door.</p>

<p>Mrs. Cathcart entered without a word, and as the
girl closed the door behind her she turned.</p>

<p>“Where is that precious husband of yours?” she
asked in a choked voice.</p>

<p>“My husband is in his study,” said the girl calmly.
“Do you want him, mother?”</p>

<p>“Do I want him?” she repeated in a choked voice.</p>

<p>Edith saw the glare in the woman’s eyes, saw, too,
the pinched and haggard cheek. For one brief moment
she pitied this woman, who had seen all her dreams
shattered at a moment when she had hoped that their
realisation was inevitable.</p>

<p>“Does he know I am coming?”</p>

<p>“I think he rather expects you,” said the girl dryly.</p>

<p>“I will see him by myself,” said Mrs. Cathcart,
turning half-way up the stairs.</p>

<p>“You will see him with me, mother, or you will not
see him at all,” said the girl.</p>

<p>“You will do as I tell you, Edith,” stormed the
woman.</p>

<p>The girl smiled.</p>

<p>“Mother,” she said gently, “you have ceased to
have any right to direct me. You have handed me over
to another guardian whose claims are greater than
yours.”</p>

<p>It was not a good preparation for the interview that
was to follow. Edith recognised this even as she
opened the door and ushered her mother in.</p>

<p>When Gilbert saw who his visitor was he rose with
a little bow. He did not offer his hand. He knew
Something of what this woman was feeling.</p>

<p>“Won’t you sit down, Mrs. Cathcart?” he said.</p>

<p>“I’ll stand for what I have to say,” she snapped.
“Now, what is the meaning of this?” She threw
down the letter which the girl had written, and which
she had read and re-read until every word was engraven
on her mind. “Is it true,” she asked fiercely, “that
you are a poor man? That you have deceived us?
That you have lied your way into a marriage——”</p>

<p>He held up his hand.</p>

<p>“You seem to forget, Mrs. Cathcart,” he said with
dignity, “that the question of my position has already
been discussed by you and me, and you have been
most emphatic in impressing upon me the fact that
no worldly considerations would weigh with you.”</p>

<p>“Worldly!” she sneered. “What do you mean by
worldly, Mr. Standerton? Are you not in the world?
Do you not live in a house and eat bread and butter
that costs money? Do you not use motor-cars that
require money for their upkeep? Whilst I am living
in the world and you are living in the world worldly
considerations will always count. I thought you were
a rich man; you’re a beggar.”</p>

<p>He smiled a little contemptuously.</p>

<p>“A pretty mess you’ve made of it,” she said harshly.
“You’ve got a woman who doesn’t love you—I
suppose you know that?”</p>

<p>He bowed.</p>

<p>“I know all that, Mrs. Cathcart,” he said. “I
knew the worst when I learnt that. The fact that
you so obviously planned the marriage because you
thought that I was Sir John Standerton’s heir does
not hurt me, because I have met so many women like
you, only”—he shrugged his shoulders—“I must
confess that I thought you were a little different to
the rest of worldly mothers—forgive me if I use that
word again. But you are not any better—you may
be a little worse,” he said, his thoughtful eyes upon
her face.</p>

<p>He was looking at her with a curious something
which the woman could not quite understand in his
eyes. She had seen that look somewhere, and in spite
of herself she shivered. The anger died away in
fear.</p>

<p>“I wanted you to postpone this wedding,” he went
on softly. “I had an especial reason, a reason I will
not give you, but which will interest you in a few
months’ time. But you were fearful of losing your
rich son-in-law. I didn’t realise then that that was
your fear. I have satisfied myself—it really doesn’t
matter how,” he said steadily, “that you are more
responsible than I for this good match.”</p>

<p>He was a changed man. Mrs. Cathcart in her gusty
rage could recognise this: there was a new soul, a
new spirit, a new determination, and—that was it!—a
new and terrible ferocity which shone from his eyes
and for the moment hardened his face till it was almost
terrible to look upon.</p>

<p>“Your daughter married me under a misapprehension.
She told you all that I had to tell—almost
all,” he corrected himself, “and I anticipated this
visit. Had you not come I should have sent for you.
Your daughter is as free as the air as far as I am
concerned. I suppose your worldliness extends to a
knowledge of the law? She can sue for a divorce
to-morrow, and attain it without any difficulty and
with little publicity.”</p>

<p>A gleam of hope came to the woman’s face.</p>

<p>“I never thought of that,” she said half to herself.
She turned quickly to her daughter, for she was a
woman of action. “Get your things and come with
me.”</p>

<p>Edith did not stir. She stood the other side of the
table, half facing her husband and wholly facing
her mother.</p>

<p>“You hear what Mr. Standerton says,” said Mrs.
Cathcart irritably. “He has opened a way of escape
to you. What he says is true. A divorce can be
obtained with no difficulty. Come with me. I will
send for your clothes.”</p>

<p>Edith still did not move.</p>

<p>Mrs. Cathcart, watching her, saw her features soften
one by one, saw the lips part in a smile and the head
fall back as peal after peal of clear laughter rang
through the room.</p>

<p>“Oh, mother!” The infinite contempt of the voice
struck the woman like the lash of a whip. “You
don’t know me! Go back with you? Divorce him?
You’re mad! If he had been a rich man indeed I
might; but for the time being, though I do not love
him, and though I should not blame him and do not
blame him if he does not love me, my lot is cast with
his, my place is here.”</p>

<p>“Melodrama!” said the elder woman
angrily.</p>

<p>“There’s a lot of truth and no end of decency in
melodrama, Mrs. Cathcart,” said Gilbert.</p>

<p>His mother-in-law stood livid with rage, then turning,
flung out of the room, and they heard the front door
slam behind her.</p>

<p>They looked at each other, this strangely-married
pair, for the space of a few seconds, and then Gilbert
held out his hand.</p>

<p>“Thank you,” he said.</p>

<p>The girl dropped her eyes.</p>

<p>“You have nothing to thank me for,” she said
listlessly. “I have done you too much wrong for
one little act to wipe out all the effects of my
selfishness.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
